README.md, before:

Conditional Generation from a Sentence Variational Autoencoder
--------------------------------------------------------------

**based on**

+ [Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space Bowman et al 2015](https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06349)
+ [Latent Constraints: Learning to Generate Conditionally from Unconditional Generative Models Jesse et al 2018](https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8XvGb0-)
+ [VAE Model Architecture](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/)
+ [Latent Constraints Model](www.alejandro.com)

**scripts**

+ `train.py` runs the model.
    + `run_vae_train_jdv.sh`: `train.py` wrapper (jdv).
+ `downloaddata.sh` downloads treebank.
+ `make_parsers.py` makes `.pkl` files:
    + `grammar.pkl`: a PCFG of the entire penn treebank parses
    + `viterbi_parser.pkl`: a cubic-time parser trained on this grammar.
    + `shift_reduce_parser.pkl`: a linear-time parser trained on this grammar.
+ `inference.py`: generates samples from a saved-model's latent space.
    + `print_interpolations.sh`: `inference.py` wrapper.

**parser performance**

Parser performance degrades rapidly for the viterbi algorithm when using longer
sentences. We might need to switch to the `shift_reduce` parser for longer
sentences.

```
viterbi      = 11.49  sec for 12 words
shift reduce = 0.55   sec for 12 words
viterbi      = 24.59  sec for 15 words
shift reduce = 0.98   sec for 15 words
viterbi      = 59.02  sec for 21 words
shift reduce = 1.17   sec for 21 words
viterbi      = 113.06 sec for 26 words
shift reduce = 1.46   sec for 26 words
viterbi      = 923.90 sec for 48 words
shift reduce = 2.54   sec for 48 words
```

**penn treebank tags**

[See here for all the details.](http://www.surdeanu.info/mihai/teaching/ista555-fall13/readings/PennTreebankConstituents.html#X)

Possibilities:

+ CONJP - Conjunction Phrase.
+ INTJ - Interjection. Corresponds approximately to the part-of-speech tag UH.
+ QP - Quantifier Phrase (i.e. complex measure/amount phrase); used within NP.
+ WHNP - Wh-noun Phrase. Introduces a clause with an NP gap. May be null
  (containing the 0 complementizer) or lexical, containing some wh-word, e.g.
  who, which book, whose daughter, none of which, or how many leopards.


![Model Architecture](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/model.png "Model Architecture")
_Note: This implementation does not support LSTM's at the moment, but RNN's and GRU's._
## Results
### Training
#### ELBO
![ELBO](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_elbo.png "ELBO")
#### Negative Log Likelihood
![NLL](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_nll.png "NLL")
### KL Divergence
![KL](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_kl.png "KL")
![KL Weight](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/kl_weight.png "KL Weight")


### Performance
Training was stopped after 4 epochs. The true ELBO was optimized for approximately 1 epoch (as can bee see in the graph above). Results are averaged over entire split.

| Split       | NLL   | KL    |
|:------------|:------:|:-----:|
| Train       | 99.821 | 7.944 |
| Validation  | 103.220 | 7.346 |
| Test        | 103.967 | 7.269 |
### Samples
Sentenes have been obtained after sampling from z ~ N(0, I).

_mr . n who was n't n with his own staff and the n n n n n_
_in the n of the n of the u . s . companies are n't likely to be reached for comment_
_when they were n in the n and then they were n a n n_
_but the company said it will be n by the end of the n n and n n_
_but the company said that it will be n n of the u . s . economy_

### Interpolating Sentences
Sentenes have been obtained after sampling twice from z ~ N(0, I) and the interpolating the two samples.

**the company said it will be n with the exception of the company**
_but the company said it will be n with the exception of the company ' s shares outstanding_
_but the company said that the company ' s n n and n n_
_but the company ' s n n in the past two years ago_
_but the company ' s n n in the past two years ago_
_but in the past few years ago that the company ' s n n_
_but in the past few years ago that they were n't disclosed_
_but in the past few years ago that they were n't disclosed_
_but in a statement that they were n't aware of the $ n million in the past few weeks_
**but in a statement that they were n't paid by the end of the past few weeks**

## Training
To run the training, please download the Penn Tree Bank data first (download from [Tomas Mikolov's webpage](http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/~imikolov/rnnlm/simple-examples.tgz)). The code expects to find at least `ptb.train.txt` and `ptb.valid.txt` in the specified data directory. The data can also be donwloaded with the `dowloaddata.sh` script.

Then training can be executed with the following command:
```
python3 train.py
```

The following arguments are available:

`--data_dir`  The path to the directory where PTB data is stored, and auxiliary data files will be stored.
`--create_data` If provided, new auxiliary data files will be created form the source data.
`--max_sequence_length` Specifies the cut off of long sentences.
`--min_occ` If a word occurs less than "min_occ" times in the corpus, it will be replaced by the <unk> token.
`--test` If provided, performance will also be measured on the test set.

`-ep`, `--epochs`
`-bs`, `--batch_size`
`-lr`, `--learning_rate`

`-eb`, `--embedding_size`
`-rnn`, `--rnn_type` Either 'rnn' or 'gru'.
`-hs`, `--hidden_size`
`-nl`, `--num_layers`
`-bi`, `--bidirectional`
`-ls`, `--latent_size`
`-wd`, `--word_dropout` Word dropout applied to the input of the Decoder, which means words will be replaced by `<unk>` with a probability of `word_dropout`.
`-ed`, `--embedding_dropout` Word embedding dropout applied to the input of the Decoder.

`-af`, `--anneal_function` Either 'logistic' or 'linear'.
`-k`, `--k` Steepness of the logistic annealing function.
`-x0`, `--x0` For 'logistic', this is the mid-point (i.e. when the weight is 0.5); for 'linear' this is the denominator.

`-v`, `--print_every`
`-tb`, `--tensorboard_logging` If provided, training progress is monitored with tensorboard.
`-log`, `--logdir` Directory of log files for tensorboard.
`-bin`,`--save_model_path` Directory where to store model checkpoints.

## Inference
For obtaining samples and interpolating between senteces, inference.py can be used.
```
python3 inference.py -c $CHECKPOINT -n $NUM_SAMPLES
```


**Code**
+ https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/latent_constraints/latentconstraints.ipynb#scrollTo=948GFxky-F7I
+ https://github.com/cheonbok94/Pytorch-Latent-Constraints-Learning-to-Generate-Conditionally-from-Unconditional-Generative-Models
+ https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE?fbclid=IwAR2G5O7Lf729Zu8od_AFKk-pDQQ5zc_v22BrwuIZxUZvVEKvCrQ3X6eWG18

Commit message:

now have phrase level tags for all sentences

README.md, after:

Conditional Generation from a Sentence Variational Autoencoder
--------------------------------------------------------------

**based on**

+ [Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space Bowman et al 2015](https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06349)
+ [Latent Constraints: Learning to Generate Conditionally from Unconditional Generative Models Jesse et al 2018](https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy8XvGb0-)
+ [VAE Model Architecture](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/)
+ [Latent Constraints Model](www.alejandro.com)

**scripts**

+ `train.py` runs the model.
    + `run_vae_train_jdv.sh`: `train.py` wrapper (jdv).
+ `downloaddata.sh` downloads treebank.
+ `make_parsers.py` makes `.pkl` files:
    + `grammar.pkl`: a PCFG of the entire penn treebank parses
    + `viterbi_parser.pkl`: a cubic-time parser trained on this grammar.
    + `shift_reduce_parser.pkl`: a linear-time parser trained on this grammar.
+ `inference.py`: generates samples from a saved-model's latent space.
    + `print_interpolations.sh`: `inference.py` wrapper.

**parser performance**

Parser performance degrades rapidly for the viterbi algorithm when using longer
sentences. We might need to switch to the `shift_reduce` parser for longer
sentences.

```
viterbi      = 11.49  sec for 12 words
shift reduce = 0.55   sec for 12 words
viterbi      = 24.59  sec for 15 words
shift reduce = 0.98   sec for 15 words
viterbi      = 59.02  sec for 21 words
shift reduce = 1.17   sec for 21 words
viterbi      = 113.06 sec for 26 words
shift reduce = 1.46   sec for 26 words
viterbi      = 923.90 sec for 48 words
shift reduce = 2.54   sec for 48 words
```

**dataset interaction**

`datasets['train'][0]` returns a dict of sentence 0 from 'train' (vs 'valid')
with the following fields:

+ `input`: numpy array of words in int form,
+ `input_str`: list of the words (preprocessed)
+ `input_tag`: list of the POS tags (maybe not required),
+ `target`: numpt array of the words in int form,
+ `target_str`: list of the words (preprocessed),
+ `target_tag`: list of the POS tags (maybe not required),
+ `length`: length of the input sentence in tokens
+ `phrase_tags`: binary vector of the phrase-level tags `['SBAR', 'PRT', 'PNP', 'INTJ', 'ADJP']`

**penn treebank tags**

[See here for all the details.](http://www.surdeanu.info/mihai/teaching/ista555-fall13/readings/PennTreebankConstituents.html#X)

Possibilities:

+ CONJP - Conjunction Phrase.
+ INTJ - Interjection. Corresponds approximately to the part-of-speech tag UH.
+ QP - Quantifier Phrase (i.e. complex measure/amount phrase); used within NP.
+ WHNP - Wh-noun Phrase. Introduces a clause with an NP gap. May be null
  (containing the 0 complementizer) or lexical, containing some wh-word, e.g.
  who, which book, whose daughter, none of which, or how many leopards.


![Model Architecture](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/model.png "Model Architecture")
_Note: This implementation does not support LSTM's at the moment, but RNN's and GRU's._
## Results
### Training
#### ELBO
![ELBO](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_elbo.png "ELBO")
#### Negative Log Likelihood
![NLL](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_nll.png "NLL")
### KL Divergence
![KL](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/train_kl.png "KL")
![KL Weight](https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE/blob/master/figs/kl_weight.png "KL Weight")


### Performance
Training was stopped after 4 epochs. The true ELBO was optimized for approximately 1 epoch (as can bee see in the graph above). Results are averaged over entire split.

| Split       | NLL   | KL    |
|:------------|:------:|:-----:|
| Train       | 99.821 | 7.944 |
| Validation  | 103.220 | 7.346 |
| Test        | 103.967 | 7.269 |
### Samples
Sentenes have been obtained after sampling from z ~ N(0, I).

_mr . n who was n't n with his own staff and the n n n n n_
_in the n of the n of the u . s . companies are n't likely to be reached for comment_
_when they were n in the n and then they were n a n n_
_but the company said it will be n by the end of the n n and n n_
_but the company said that it will be n n of the u . s . economy_

### Interpolating Sentences
Sentenes have been obtained after sampling twice from z ~ N(0, I) and the interpolating the two samples.

**the company said it will be n with the exception of the company**
_but the company said it will be n with the exception of the company ' s shares outstanding_
_but the company said that the company ' s n n and n n_
_but the company ' s n n in the past two years ago_
_but the company ' s n n in the past two years ago_
_but in the past few years ago that the company ' s n n_
_but in the past few years ago that they were n't disclosed_
_but in the past few years ago that they were n't disclosed_
_but in a statement that they were n't aware of the $ n million in the past few weeks_
**but in a statement that they were n't paid by the end of the past few weeks**

## Training
To run the training, please download the Penn Tree Bank data first (download from [Tomas Mikolov's webpage](http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/~imikolov/rnnlm/simple-examples.tgz)). The code expects to find at least `ptb.train.txt` and `ptb.valid.txt` in the specified data directory. The data can also be donwloaded with the `dowloaddata.sh` script.

Then training can be executed with the following command:
```
python3 train.py
```

The following arguments are available:

`--data_dir`  The path to the directory where PTB data is stored, and auxiliary data files will be stored.
`--create_data` If provided, new auxiliary data files will be created form the source data.
`--max_sequence_length` Specifies the cut off of long sentences.
`--min_occ` If a word occurs less than "min_occ" times in the corpus, it will be replaced by the <unk> token.
`--test` If provided, performance will also be measured on the test set.

`-ep`, `--epochs`
`-bs`, `--batch_size`
`-lr`, `--learning_rate`

`-eb`, `--embedding_size`
`-rnn`, `--rnn_type` Either 'rnn' or 'gru'.
`-hs`, `--hidden_size`
`-nl`, `--num_layers`
`-bi`, `--bidirectional`
`-ls`, `--latent_size`
`-wd`, `--word_dropout` Word dropout applied to the input of the Decoder, which means words will be replaced by `<unk>` with a probability of `word_dropout`.
`-ed`, `--embedding_dropout` Word embedding dropout applied to the input of the Decoder.

`-af`, `--anneal_function` Either 'logistic' or 'linear'.
`-k`, `--k` Steepness of the logistic annealing function.
`-x0`, `--x0` For 'logistic', this is the mid-point (i.e. when the weight is 0.5); for 'linear' this is the denominator.

`-v`, `--print_every`
`-tb`, `--tensorboard_logging` If provided, training progress is monitored with tensorboard.
`-log`, `--logdir` Directory of log files for tensorboard.
`-bin`,`--save_model_path` Directory where to store model checkpoints.

## Inference
For obtaining samples and interpolating between senteces, inference.py can be used.
```
python3 inference.py -c $CHECKPOINT -n $NUM_SAMPLES
```


**Code**
+ https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/latent_constraints/latentconstraints.ipynb#scrollTo=948GFxky-F7I
+ https://github.com/cheonbok94/Pytorch-Latent-Constraints-Learning-to-Generate-Conditionally-from-Unconditional-Generative-Models
+ https://github.com/timbmg/Sentence-VAE?fbclid=IwAR2G5O7Lf729Zu8od_AFKk-pDQQ5zc_v22BrwuIZxUZvVEKvCrQ3X6eWG18
